Title: About

----

Intro: 

There is no doubt that Berlin was once a culinary wasteland – there are only so many sausages a person can eat. And the same goes for potatoes and cabbage. So it must have come as a relief to many food-lovers when first the Turks came, bringing lahmacun and lentil soup (it's not all about Döner kebabs you know) and later immigrants from Lebanon and Syria brought baba ghanoush and manakish…

Thanks are also due to all those Australians who figured out London was way too expensive for them and opened up coffee shops left, right and centre... Third wave coffee is in Berlin to stay, and if that's not your "cup of tea", then we'll get you a good old espresso from the Italians or a halfway decent cup of German Kaffee - and perhaps a slice of cake with that? (If there's one German culinary tradition worth perpetuating, it's certainly Kaffee und Kuchen in the afternoon.)

There are those for whom a sweet tooth is not only an expression – if that's what you're after we'll skip the savoury and go straight on to dessert – ice cream, pistachio baklava and the finest cheesecake this side of the Atlantic (and that is no exaggeration). 

Or if you're in a breakfast sort of mood, we'll take you to a croissanterie (for the flakiest croissant this side of the Rhine) or get you a brezel. If pancakes are what you're after, then we'll take you to one of the few places in town which actually knows what the word means. 

Food is not the same without drink so we might also take you to a Kiez wine shop to taste a Riesling or a Grauburgunder – the best whites not only Germany, but the world, has to offer. If you're more down-to-earth and just fancy a beer, we can help you out there too. Those who want a simple OJ can get a freshly squeezed one at our favourite juice bar on Sonnenallee.

It's up to you – food is about enjoyment and Berlin by Food wants you to be happy, so you tell us what you're into and we'll show you a good time.

----

Text: 

Berlin by Food is currently a one-woman show. The woman in question is me - Anne - a pescatarian Franco-American-British Berliner who studied German and Russian and likes to cook and eat. When not giving tours, I earn my living as a journalist, translator and coordinator for the Stolpersteine, a Holocaust commemoration project. I am, as you can tell, eclectic and that's why I’m your perfect guide. I will adapt to your wishes - and no culinary desire will be too wild .. I have lived in Berlin for going on 10 years now and have eaten my way around the city. I can advise on the best restaurants, the dodgiest Eckkneipe (a dying breed, so get your Berliner Pils while you still can), I can tell you where to find vegan chocolate ice-cream to die for, an avocado smoothie that will blow your socks off or a slice of pizza that will transport you to Italy. I can even advise you on where to check out Currywurst and kebabs, though I can't exactly vouch for their taste because I haven’t eaten a scrap of meat in quite a while… 

If your appetite is whetted, send me an email or give me a phone call... Tours are privately organised, tailor-made to suit your taste. 

You can take the tours in English, French or German. English is my language mais je parle aussi francais und für die, die Deutsch hören wollen (freilich mit Akzent), dann keine Sorge! 

What is important is that you remember this is a walking tour and you therefore need good shoes to cope with the distances and the cobblestones. I recommend that you have waterproofs and an umbrella on hand - Berlin is not typically a wet city but these days you never know. The "Open Spaces" tour is only conducted when it is dry (there is a reason why I left the UK!).