Title: Home

----

Intro: 

# Who said Berlin was all about currywurst?

> At Berlin by Food, we show you the other Berlin – the mouth-watering falafels, hummus that rivals the very best in the Middle East, gözleme a Turkish mama would be proud of, patisserie to make a Frenchman swoon, pizza a discerning Naples bambino would happily wolf down, sushi until now tasted only in Tokyo…

----

Text: 

OK, so perhaps I exaggerate: the sushi really is nothing to write home about. But Berlin today is exploding with flavours and these tours are here to prove it to you, as well as to give you a taste of the changing socio-political circumstances.

The German capital is a fragmented city with a troubled past – that's what draws many of us – but it also has an everchanging vibrant present and immigrants continue to arrive, fleeing war, conflict, political persecution and discrimination, economic misery or perhaps simply boredom. Immigration is the best thing that can ever happen to a city’s food scene. Londoners know full well that nobody would have coped with jellied eels and boiled cabbage for much longer. New York would not be New York without bagels and pizza from Europe... Even Paris, which has nothing to blush about when it comes to food, has become an even better place to eat since Chinese, Moroccan and Vietnamese chefs arrived.

There is no doubt that Berlin was once a culinary wasteland – there are only so many sausages a person can eat. And the same goes for potatoes and cabbage. So it must have come as a relief to many food-lovers when first the Turks came, bringing lahmacun and lentil soup (it's not all about döner kebabs) and later immigrants from Lebanon and Syria introduced baba ghanoush and manakish to the city.

Thanks are also due to all those Australians who figured out London was way too expensive for them and opened up coffee shops left, right and centre, inspiring a coffee revolution. Filter coffee and flat whites are here to stay, and if they’re not your "cup of tea", then we'll get you a good old espresso from the Italians or a halfway decent cup of German Kaffee - and perhaps a slice of cake with that? (If there's one German culinary tradition worth perpetuating, it's certainly Kaffee und Kuchen in the afternoon.) If it’s tea you’re after, there are some fine Japanese tearooms and a unique Greek herbal tea salon.

It's up to you – food is about enjoyment and Berlin by Food wants you to be happy, so tell us what you're into and we'll do our best to accommodate.

If your appetite is whetted, fill out the contact form or send me an email (annecaetlinthomasbbf@gmail.com). Tours are privately organised, tailor-made to suit most tastes. I keep the numbers low. No loudspeakers for me!

You can take the tours in English, French or German. English is my language mais je parle aussi francais und wenn ihr Deutsch hören wollt (freilich mit Akzent), dann kein Problem!